Extensions (#3237)
wso2/docs-is: en/docs/references/extend/federation/write-a-custom-federated-authenticator.md

---

## Write the federated authenticator

To write the federated authenticator:

> 1. Create a `maven` project for the custom federated authenticator. Refer the following files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a `maven` project for the custom federated authenticator. Refer the following files:
```

>     - [pom.xml](https://github.com/wso2/samples-is/blob/master/authenticators/components/org.wso2.carbon.identity.sample.federated.authenticator/pom.xml) file used for the sample custom federated authenticator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The [pom.xml](https://github.com/wso2/samples-is/blob/master/authenticators/components/org.wso2.carbon.identity.sample.federated.authenticator/pom.xml) file used for the sample custom federated authenticator.
```

>     - [service component class](https://github.com/wso2/samples-is/blob/master/authenticators/components/org.wso2.carbon.identity.sample.federated.authenticator/src/main/java/org/wso2/carbon/identity/custom/federated/authenticator/internal/CustomFederatedAuthenticatorServiceComponent.java) file to deploy in WSO2 Identity Server and register it as a federated authenticator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The [service component class](https://github.com/wso2/samples-is/blob/master/authenticators/components/org.wso2.carbon.identity.sample.federated.authenticator/src/main/java/org/wso2/carbon/identity/custom/federated/authenticator/internal/CustomFederatedAuthenticatorServiceComponent.java) file to deploy in WSO2 Identity Server and register it as a federated authenticator.
```

Reviewer: Register `what` as a federated authenticator?

2. Write the [custom federated authenticator](https://github.com/wso2/samples-is/blob/master/authenticators/components/org.wso2.carbon.identity.sample.federated.authenticator/src/main/java/org/wso2/carbon/identity/custom/federated/authenticator/CustomFederatedAuthenticator.java) by extending the
[AbstractApplicationAuthenticator](https://github.com/wso2/carbon-identity-framework/blob/v5.18.187/components/authentication-framework/org.wso2.carbon.identity.application.authentication.framework/src/main/java/org/wso2/carbon/identity/application/authentication/framework/AbstractApplicationAuthenticator.java) class and implementing the
[FederatedApplicationAuthenticator](https://github.com/wso2/carbon-identity-framework/blob/v5.18.187/components/authentication-framework/org.wso2.carbon.identity.application.authentication.framework/src/main/java/org/wso2/carbon/identity/application/authentication/framework/FederatedApplicationAuthenticator.java) class.

!!! info

>     You can find a custom federated authenticator [here](https://github.com/wso2/samples-is/tree/master/authenticators/components/org.wso2.carbon.identity.sample.federated.authenticator) for your reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    See the sample [custom federated authenticator](https://github.com/wso2/samples-is/tree/master/authenticators/components/org.wso2.carbon.identity.sample.federated.authenticator) for your reference.
```

    | [protected void initiateAuthenticationRequest(HttpServletRequest request,HttpServletResponse response, AuthenticationContext context)](https://github.com/wso2/samples-is/blob/master/authenticators/components/org.wso2.carbon.identity.sample.federated.authenticator/src/main/java/org/wso2/carbon/identity/custom/federated/authenticator/CustomFederatedAuthenticator.java#L138-L139) | Redirects the user to the login page to authenticate and in this sample, the user is redirected to the login page of the application which is configured in the partner identity server which acts as the external service. |
    | [protected void processAuthenticationResponse(HttpServletRequest request,HttpServletResponse response, AuthenticationContext context)](https://github.com/wso2/samples-is/blob/master/authenticators/components/org.wso2.carbon.identity.sample.federated.authenticator/src/main/java/org/wso2/carbon/identity/custom/federated/authenticator/CustomFederatedAuthenticator.java#L169-L171) | Implements the logic of the custom federated authenticator.    |

---

## Deploy the authenticator

To deploy the custom federated authenticator:

> 1. Navigate to the root of your project and compile the service by running the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open a terminal, navigate to the root of your project, and compile the service by running the following command.
```

    ``` xml
    mvn clean install
    ```

2. Copy the generated `org.wso2.carbon.identity.custom.federated.authenticator-1.0.0.jar` file from `<Custom-federated-authenticator>/target` folder to the `<IS_HOME>/repository/components/dropins` folder.

---

## Configure the partner identity server

In this guide, the partner identity server acts as the external system. 

> Therefore, it is required to run a second identity server instance as the partner identity server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, it is required to run a second WSO2 Identity Server instance as the partner identity server.
```

### Set up partner IS

> Add the following config to the `<PARTNER_IS_HOME>/repository/conf/deployment.toml` file to eun the partner identity server  on the same machine in a different port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following config to the `<PARTNER_IS_HOME>/repository/conf/deployment.toml` file to be able to run the partner identity server  on the same machine in a different port.
```

``` toml
[server]
offset=1
```

After starting that partner identity server, it will run on [localhost:9444](https://localhost:9444/carbon).

### Register a service provider

To register and configure the service provider on the partner IS:

1. On the management console (`https://<PARTNER_IS_HOST>:<PARTNER_IS_PORT>/carbon`) of the partner identity server, go to **Main** > **Identity** > **Service Providers** > **Add**.

> 2. Enter `pickup-dispatch` as the **Service Provider Name**, and click **Register**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Enter `pickup-dispatch` as the **Service Provider Name** and click **Register**.
```

> 3. Expand the **Inbound Authentication Configuration > OAuth/OpenID Connect Configuration** section and, click **Configure**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Expand **Inbound Authentication Configuration > OAuth/OpenID Connect Configuration** and, click **Configure**.
```

> 4. Enter the **Callback Url** as `https://localhost:9443/commonauth`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Enter `https://localhost:9443/commonauth` as the **Callback Url**.
```

> 5. Click **Add**. Note that `client key` and `client secret` are generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Click **Add**. Note that the `client key` and `client secret` are generated.
```

6. Click **Update** to save the configurations.

!!! info "Download and deploy the application"

>     On the Partner Identity Server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    On the partner identity server:
```

>     - Download the [OIDC pickup-dispatch sample](https://github.com/wso2/samples-is/releases/download/v4.3.0/pickup-dispatch.war) application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Download the [OIDC pickup-dispatch sample](https://github.com/wso2/samples-is/releases/download/v4.3.0/pickup-dispatch.war) application.
```
